# Principles of computer security

## Trust and trojan horses

## Program printing its own source when ran:

Easy with interpreted language, simply open file and print contents

For compiled programs:
- Consider program containing 3 blocks:
  - Block of code s1
  - Long string t = s1 | s2
  - Block of code s2
  - `print t[1 ... |s1|]`, first |s1| chars of t are s1
  - `print '"'; print t; print '"'`
  - `print t[|s1| + 1 ... |t|]`

- As t = s1 | s2, the output will be the source of the program

Such programs (= quines) exist in all programming languages, due to Kleene's
recursion theorem from computability theorem

## Compiling the first compiler

Today, one cannot 'produce' (manufacturing) new computing technology without
existing computing technology. E.g hardware design requires existing tools,
which run on existing hardware.

First C compiler: Implemented by hand (in assembly), then used to compile
future compilers.

Example of extending compiler: Compiler knows ASCII mapping for special
characters, e.g. '\n' => 10, '\r' => 13. Implemented with code similar to
following:
```
if (c == '\n') { return '\n' }
if (c == '\r') { return '\c' }
```
This works because the existing compiler knows what e.g. '\n' maps to. But what
about a new character e.g. '\v' (vertical tab)?

First teach it:
```
if (c == '\v') { return (char)0xB };
```

Compile it. Then, the rule can be changed to:
```
if (c == '\v') { return '\v' }
```

## Extending a compiler with a backdoor

Consider a compiler 'taught' to include malicious code in its output. This
behaviour is *not visible in its source code*, but only in the binary output.

Worse still, any tool I use to analyze the binary might be compromised, if it
was compiled by a compromised compiler.

Claim: Even if source code available, compiled binary might be compromised.

Such backdoors could also exist in hardware (microcode).

### Example

Step 1:
- Compiler C contains backdoor: `if app == victim { insert_backdor }`
- Backdoor visible in source of C

Step 2:
- Compiler C' contains backdoor: `if app == compiler { insert_backdoor_in_compiler_which_inserts_backdoor_in_victim }`
- Compiler C' used to compile compiler C, from trusted source
- Compiler backdoor not visible in C's source, but is present in C
- 'Trusted' compiler C then compiles victim app with backdoor

"Solution": Inspect binary C, there the backdoor is visible.
But what if my inspection tools are compromised...

## Self-replicating code

Self-replicating code has had a lot of success in the form of malware or
viruses. Defences are similar:

- Start from clean systems
- Physically secure storage
- Verify authenticity of software
- Trust the process and the people behind your software

See also: Ken Thompson's "reflections on trusting trust".

## Access control

Concept:

```
Subject -- request(object) --> Reference monitor ----> Object
                                        ^
                                        |
                                        v
                                      Policy
```

Reference monitor is logical concept which models how requests from subjects (=
principals) to objects (= resources) are governed.
Policy defines, for each subject-object pair, all permitted operations. Compare
a matrix, columns are objects, rows are subjects, entries are objects permitted
by that subject on that object.

Storage of policy varies, e.g:
- Column-based (== ACL): each object knows what subjects are allowed to do
  with it, e.g. file system permissions
- Full matrix: Full matrix stored, e.g. sudoers file specifies for each user
  exactly which commands they may issue
- Row-based: List of capabilities of a subject for all objects. Seldom seen,
  e.g. in keycards with public-key crypto. Permission definition given to user,
  so must be protected somehow.

Column-based most popular.

## Security in layers

Textbook layers for security:
- Application
- OS services
- OS kernel
- Hardware

Real-world layers for security (due to networked applications, virtualization,
...) might contain:

- Application (web)
- Browser
- Runtime VM (eg JVM)
- Guest OS services
- Guest OS kernel
- Guest hardware 
- OS services
- OS kernel
- OS hardware

## Trusted execution environments et al

Trusted execution environments (TEE) used on e.g. smart cards, bank chips, ...
to provide a trusted environment for computations.

More advanced: HSMs.
