# Data privacy laws

## History

- Up to 70s/80s: Focus on private person / government interaction. Right to
  free speech, surveillance state, ...
- Recently: Focus on private person / business interaction.
- Lead to new privacy laws in western countries, culminating in GDPR 2018
- Similar 'building blocks', or principles, making up privacy laws across the
  globe: Transparency, good faith, ... => Summarized as lawfulness

## GDPR

- Applies to everyone processing data from EU residents, or processing it in the
  EU
- Harmonized law across all of EU
- Affects also outside businesses - a law with so-called 'extraterritorial
  applicability'
  - Enforcement against companies with no EU presence more difficulty, has to
    be done with e.g. import restrictions
- Countries have a bit of leeway in what to enforce as GDPR

### Examples

- Dynamic IP: Deemed personal, including at least one judgement. Reason: ISP
  has data which allows mapping dynamic IP to PII.

### Controller / processor

- Controller: Determines how and why PII is processed, responsible when it
  violates GDPR
- Processor: Processes data on behalf of the controller.
- Joint controller: Multiple entities acting together as controller.

### Rights

- Grants data owner certain set of rights: Right for erasure, right to correct,
  ...

### Sanctions

- Maximum of 2% revenue (or 10 million if higher) if notiication after breach
  violated, record keeping violated, ...
- Maximum of 4% revenue (or 20 million if higher) if no justification for
  processing of data they processed

Problem: Proving impact e.g. a loss of data had on a data subject. "How much is
my Facebook data worth"?

### Consent

Consent must be:
- Freely given: So declining must not impact service
- Specific
- Informed
- Unambiguous

Many dark patterns / antipatterns when it comes to e.g. cookie consent on web.

Consent must also be auditable -> Track when and how consent was given by a
user.

## Switzerland: revDSG

- New version of Swiss DSG. revDSG / revDPA.
- Enforced from 01.01.2022
- Same core concepts as GDPR, i.e. what to protect
- Data brean notifications similar
- DPOs: Not needed (data protection officers)
- Sanctions: Lighter than GDPR, but higher than what was in place in old DSG
- Cross border transfer: No specification yet
